Decomposition tech note updated for CLM6 (#4063)
ESCOMP/CTSM: doc/source/tech_note/Decomposition/CLM50_Tech_Note_Decomposition.rst

Decomposition
=================

> Decomposition of fresh litter material into progressively longer turnover pools of soil organic matter is represented in CLM as a cascade of transformations between decomposing coarse woody debris (CWD), litter, and soil organic matter (SOM) pools, each defined at :math:`{n}_{lev}` vertical levels. The default soil submodel in CLM6 is comparable to the Century model (Parton et al 1988). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Decomposition of fresh litter material into progressively longer turnover pools of soil organic matter is represented in CLM as a cascade of transformations between decomposing coarse woody debris (CWD), litter, and soil organic matter (SOM) pools, each defined at :math:`{n}_{lev}` levels in the vertical. The default soil submodel in CLM6 is comparable to the Century model (:ref:`Parton et al. 1988 <Partonetal1988>`). 
```

Century-based Pool Structure, Rate Constants and Parameters
----------------------------------------------------------------

> The Century-based decomposition cascade is a first-order decay model. It includes a CWD pool, 3 litter pools, and 3 soil organic matter pools. Pools each have a turnover time and are connected to a number of different pools, as seen in Figure 2.22.1. Soil pools also each have a fixed C:N ratio. Each flux between pools has a respiration fraction that determines the proportion of carbon lost during the flux.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Century-based decomposition cascade is a first-order decay model. It includes a CWD pool, 3 litter pools, and 3 soil organic matter pools. Pools each have a turnover time and are connected to a number of different pools, as seen in :numref:`Figure Century-based soil model structure`. Soil pools also each have a fixed C:N ratio. Each flux between pools has a respiration fraction that determines the proportion of carbon lost during the flux.
```

.. _Figure Century-based soil model structure:

.. Figure:: CLM6_decomp_image.png

  Pool structure, transitions, respired fractions (numbers at end of arrows), and turnover times (numbers in boxes) for the default, Century-based soil model in CLM.

> The turnover times for the Century-based pool structure follow those described in Parton et al. (1988) (Table 2.22.1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The turnover times for the Century-based pool structure follow those described in :ref:`Parton et al. (1988) <Partonetal1988>` (:numref:`Table Turnover times`).
```

   r_{water} =\sum _{j=1}^{5}\left\{\begin{array}{l} {0\qquad {\rm for\; }\Psi _{j} <\Psi _{\min } } \\ {\frac{\log \left({\Psi _{\min } \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {\Psi _{\min }  \Psi _{j} }} \right.} \Psi _{j} } \right)}{\log \left({\Psi _{\min } \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {\Psi _{\min }  \Psi _{\max } }} \right.} \Psi _{\max } } \right)} w_{soil,\, j} \qquad {\rm for\; }\Psi _{\min } \le \Psi _{j} \le \Psi _{\max } } \\ {1\qquad {\rm for\; }\Psi _{j} >\Psi _{\max } \qquad \qquad } \end{array}\right\}

> where :math:`{\Psi}_{j}` is the soil water potential in layer *j*, :math:`{\Psi}_{min}` is a lower limit for soil water potential control on decomposition rate. :math:`{\Psi}_{max,j}` (MPa) is the soil moisture at which decomposition proceeds at a moisture-unlimited rate. The default value of :math:`{\Psi}_{max,j}` for CLM6 is -0.002 MPa, nominally at field capacity. For frozen soils, the bulk of the rapid dropoff in decomposition with decreasing temperature is due to the moisture limitation, since matric potential is limited by temperature in the supercooled water formulation of Niu and Yang (2006),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where :math:`{\Psi}_{j}` is the soil water potential in layer *j*, :math:`{\Psi}_{min}` is a lower limit for soil water potential control on decomposition rate. :math:`{\Psi}_{max,j}` (MPa) is the soil moisture at which decomposition proceeds at a moisture-unlimited rate. The default value of :math:`{\Psi}_{max,j}` for CLM6 is -0.002 MPa, nominally at field capacity. For frozen soils, the bulk of the rapid dropoff in decomposition with decreasing temperature is due to the moisture limitation, since matric potential is limited by temperature in the supercooled water formulation of :ref:`Niu and Yang (2006) <NiuYang2006>`,
```

An additional frozen decomposition limitation can be specified using a 'frozen Q\ :sub:`10`' following :ref:`Koven et al. (2011) <Kovenetal2011>`, however the default value of this is the same as the unfrozen Q\ :sub:`10` value, and therefore the basic hypothesis is that frozen respiration is limited by liquid water availability, and can be modeled following the same approach as thawed but dry soils.

> An additional rate scalar, :math:`{r}_{oxygen}` is enabled when the CH\ :sub:`4` submodel is used. This limits decomposition when there is insufficient molecular oxygen to satisfy stoichiometric demand (1 mol O\ :sub:`2` consumed per mol CO\ :sub:`2` produced) from heterotrophic decomposers, and supply from diffusion through soil layers (unsaturated and saturated) or aerenchyma (Chapter 19). A minimum value of :math:`{r}_{oxygen}` is set at 0.2, with the assumption that oxygen within organic tissues can supply the necessary stoichiometric demand at this rate. This value lies between estimates of 0.025–0.1 (Frolking et al. 2001), and 0.35 (Wania et al. 2009); the large range of these estimates poses a large unresolved uncertainty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An additional rate scalar, :math:`{r}_{oxygen}` is enabled when the CH\ :sub:`4` submodel is used. This limits decomposition when there is insufficient molecular oxygen to satisfy stoichiometric demand (1 mol O\ :sub:`2` consumed per mol CO\ :sub:`2` produced) from heterotrophic decomposers, and supply from diffusion through soil layers (unsaturated and saturated) or aerenchyma (Chapter :numref:`rst_Methane Model`). A minimum value of :math:`{r}_{oxygen}` is set at 0.2, with the assumption that oxygen within organic tissues can supply the necessary stoichiometric demand at this rate. This value lies between estimates of 0.025–0.1 (:ref:`Frolking et al. 2001 <Frolkingetal2001>`), and 0.35 (:ref:`Wania et al. 2009 <Waniaetal2009>`); the large range of these estimates poses a large unresolved uncertainty.
```

   CF_{pot,\, SOM3} ={CS_{SOM3} k_{SOM3} r_{total} \mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CS_{SOM3} k_{SOM3} r_{total}  \Delta t}} \right.} \Delta t}

> where the factor (1/:math:`\Delta`\ *t*) is included because the rate constant is calculated for the entire timestep (Eqs. and ), but the convention is to express all fluxes on a per-second basis. Potential mineral nitrogen fluxes associated with these decomposition steps are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the factor (1/:math:`\Delta`\ *t*) is included because the rate constant is calculated for the entire timestep (see equations above), but the convention is to express all fluxes on a per-second basis. Potential mineral nitrogen fluxes associated with these decomposition steps are:
```
@katierocci could you fill the equation labels here?

Reviewer: I looked around a bit and did not find equations for these rate constants, so maybe we remove the eqs. references?

.. math::
   :label: 21.19)

   NF_{pot\_ min,\, Lit1\to SOM1} ={CF_{pot,\, Lit1} \left(1-rf_{Lit1} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{Lit1} } \right)\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CF_{pot,\, Lit1} \left(1-rf_{Lit1} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{Lit1} } \right) CN_{SOM1} }} \right.} CN_{SOM1} }

.. math::

>    :label: 21.20)

Reviewer: @katierocci here and elsewhere it's better to avoid hardwiring equation labels with numbers since the numbers may change over time. Better to come up with a short (two to four word) description of the equation instead.

I'm not suggesting updating all the equations in the chapter, but since you updated a couple, I'm recommending an alternate update for those. Or go back to their earlier labels, which also raises the question:

Do you know whether the equations with changed labels are referenced in other chapters? That possibility favors the argument of returning them to their earlier labels.

Reviewer: I checked for references to "ZEqnNum" and found none, so I will resolve my comment without requesting follow-up.

.. math::
   :label: 21.23)

   NF_{pot\_ min,\, SOM2\to SOM3} ={CF_{pot,\, SOM2} \left(1-rf_{SOM2} -\frac{CN_{SOM3} }{CN_{SOM2} } \right)\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CF_{pot,\, SOM2} \left(1-rf_{SOM2} -\frac{CN_{SOM3} }{CN_{SOM2} } \right) CN_{SOM3} }} \right.} CN_{SOM3} }

.. math::
   :label: 21.24)

   NF_{pot\_ min,\, SOM1\to SOM3} ={CF_{pot,\, SOM1} \left(1-rf_{SOM1} -\frac{CN_{SOM3} }{CN_{SOM1} } \right)\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CF_{pot,\, SOM3} \left(1-rf_{SOM1} -\frac{CN_{SOM3} }{CN_{SOM1} } \right) CN_{SOM3} }} \right.} CN_{SOM3} }

.. math::
   :label: 21.25)

   NF_{pot\_ min,\, SOM2\to SOM1} ={CF_{pot,\, SOM2} \left(1-rf_{SOM2} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{SOM2} } \right)\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CF_{pot,\, SOM1} \left(1-rf_{SOM2} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{SOM2} } \right) CN_{SOM1} }} \right.} CN_{SOM1} }

.. math::
   :label: 21.26)

   NF_{pot\_ min,\, SOM3\to SOM1} ={CF_{pot,\, SOM3} \left(1-rf_{SOM3} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{SOM3} } \right)\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {CF_{pot,\, SOM1} \left(1-rf_{SOM3} -\frac{CN_{SOM1} }{CN_{SOM3} } \right) CN_{SOM1} }} \right.} CN_{SOM1} }

> Steps in the decomposition cascade that result in release of new mineral nitrogen (mineralization fluxes) are allowed to proceed at their potential rates, without modification for nitrogen availability. Steps that result in an uptake of mineral nitrogen (immobilization fluxes) are subject to rate limitation, depending on the availability of mineral nitrogen, the total immobilization demand, and the total demand for soil mineral nitrogen to support new plant growth. The potential mineral nitrogen fluxes from Eqs. 2.21.19-2.21.26 are evaluated, summing all the positive fluxes to generate the total potential nitrogen immobilization flux (:math:`{NF}_{immob\_demand}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`), and summing absolute values of all the negative fluxes to generate the total nitrogen mineralization flux (:math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`). Since :math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}` is a source of new mineral nitrogen to the soil mineral nitrogen pool it is not limited by the availability of soil mineral nitrogen, and is therefore an actual as opposed to a potential flux.

Reviewer: Does the reference to Eqs. 2.21.19-2.21.26 actually mean 2.22.14-2.22.21? If so replace with
```suggestion
Steps in the decomposition cascade that result in release of new mineral nitrogen (mineralization fluxes) are allowed to proceed at their potential rates, without modification for nitrogen availability. Steps that result in an uptake of mineral nitrogen (immobilization fluxes) are subject to rate limitation, depending on the availability of mineral nitrogen, the total immobilization demand, and the total demand for soil mineral nitrogen to support new plant growth. The potential mineral nitrogen fluxes from Eqs. :eq:`21.19`-:eq:`21.26` are evaluated, summing all the positive fluxes to generate the total potential nitrogen immobilization flux (:math:`{NF}_{immob\_demand}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`), and summing absolute values of all the negative fluxes to generate the total nitrogen mineralization flux (:math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`). Since :math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}` is a source of new mineral nitrogen to the soil mineral nitrogen pool it is not limited by the availability of soil mineral nitrogen, and is therefore an actual as opposed to a potential flux.
```

> Steps in the decomposition cascade that result in release of new mineral nitrogen (mineralization fluxes) are allowed to proceed at their potential rates, without modification for nitrogen availability. Steps that result in an uptake of mineral nitrogen (immobilization fluxes) are subject to rate limitation, depending on the availability of mineral nitrogen, the total immobilization demand, and the total demand for soil mineral nitrogen to support new plant growth. The potential mineral nitrogen fluxes from Eqs. :eq:`21.19`-:eq:`21.26` are evaluated, summing all the positive fluxes to generate the total potential nitrogen immobilization flux (:math:`{NF}_{immob\_demand}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`), and summing absolute values of all the negative fluxes to generate the total nitrogen mineralization flux (:math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`). Since :math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}` is a source of new mineral nitrogen to the soil mineral nitrogen pool it is not limited by the availability of soil mineral nitrogen, and is therefore an actual as opposed to a potential flux.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Steps in the decomposition cascade that result in release of new mineral nitrogen (mineralization fluxes) are allowed to proceed at their potential rates, without modification for nitrogen availability. Steps that result in an uptake of mineral nitrogen (immobilization fluxes) are subject to rate limitation, depending on the availability of mineral nitrogen, the total immobilization demand, and the total demand for soil mineral nitrogen to support new plant growth. The potential mineral nitrogen fluxes from Eqs. :eq:`21.19)`-:eq:`21.26)` are evaluated, summing all the positive fluxes to generate the total potential nitrogen immobilization flux (:math:`{NF}_{immob\_demand}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`), and summing absolute values of all the negative fluxes to generate the total nitrogen mineralization flux (:math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}`, gN m\ :sup:`-2` s\ :sup:`-1`). Since :math:`{NF}_{gross\_nmin}` is a source of new mineral nitrogen to the soil mineral nitrogen pool it is not limited by the availability of soil mineral nitrogen, and is therefore an actual as opposed to a potential flux.
```

> The base acceleration terms for the two decomposition cascades are shown in Tables 15.1 and 15.3. In addition to the base terms, CLM5 also includes a geographic term to the acceleration in order to apply larger values to high-latitude systems, where decomposition rates are particularly slow and thus equilibration can take significantly longer than in temperate or tropical climates. This geographic term takes the form of a logistic equation, where :math:`{a}_{i}` is equal to the product of the base acceleration term and :math:`{a}_{l}` below:

Reviewer: @katierocci should this hardwired reference to Tables 15.1 and 15.3 change to the "Turnover times" table (currently 2.22.1)? If so, then change to

```suggestion
The base acceleration terms for the two decomposition cascades are shown in :numref:`Table Turnover times`. In addition to the base terms, CLM5 also includes a geographic term to the acceleration in order to apply larger values to high-latitude systems, where decomposition rates are particularly slow and thus equilibration can take significantly longer than in temperate or tropical climates. This geographic term takes the form of a logistic equation, where :math:`{a}_{i}` is equal to the product of the base acceleration term and :math:`{a}_{l}` below:
```

.. math::
   :label: 21.70)

    a_l = 1 + 50 / \left ( 1 + exp \left (-0.1 * (abs(latitude) -
    60 ) \right ) \right )

Alternate soil sub-model: MIMICS
-----------------------------------------

> In CLM6, there is a new capability to use the MIcrobial-MIneral Carbon Stabilization (MIMICS) model (:ref:`Wieder et al. 2014 <Wiederetal2014>`; :ref:`Wieder et al. 2015b <Wiederetal2015b>`; :ref:`Kyker-Snowman et al. 2020 <KykerSnowmanetal2020>`) instead of the Century-like soil model. MIMICS is a microbially-explicit soil biogeochemical model that represents modern understanding about plant and microbial contributions to soil organic matter and mineral stabilization as a protection mechanism for soil organic matter. MIMICS has two litter pools, two microbial pools, and three soil organic matter pools that are connected as in Figure 2.22.9. Details about MIMICS-CN can be found in :ref:`Kyker-Snowman et al. (2020) <KykerSnowmanetal2020>`. 

Reviewer: This hardwired figure reference probably needs to change to

```suggestion
In CLM6, there is a new capability to use the MIcrobial-MIneral Carbon Stabilization (MIMICS) model (:ref:`Wieder et al. 2014 <Wiederetal2014>`; :ref:`Wieder et al. 2015b <Wiederetal2015b>`; :ref:`Kyker-Snowman et al. 2020 <KykerSnowmanetal2020>`) instead of the Century-like soil model. MIMICS is a microbially-explicit soil biogeochemical model that represents modern understanding about plant and microbial contributions to soil organic matter and mineral stabilization as a protection mechanism for soil organic matter. MIMICS has two litter pools, two microbial pools, and three soil organic matter pools that are connected as in :numref:`Figure MIMICS soil model structure`. Details about MIMICS-CN can be found in :ref:`Kyker-Snowman et al. (2020) <KykerSnowmanetal2020>`. 
```
